
Disclaimer:
声明:
These ACMG Standards and Guidelines were developed primarily as an educational resource for clinical laboratory geneticists to help them provide quality clinical laboratory services.
这份指南仅供临床遗传师学习参考，帮助他们提高临床服务质量。
Adherence to these standards and guidelines is voluntary and does not necessarily assure a successful medical outcome.
自主决定是否遵守这份指南，本指南并不保证医疗结果。
These Standards and Guidelines should not be considered inclusive of all proper procedures and tests or exclusive of other procedures and tests that are reasonably directed to obtaining the same results.
不应认为本指南包含了所有合适的检查或其他可能有同等功效的检查。
In determining the propriety of any specific procedure or test, the clinical laboratory geneticist should apply his or her own professional judgment to the specific circumstances presented by the individual patient or specimen.
在具体患者的诊疗中，临床遗传师应该运用专业判断，并结合患者或标本具体的情况。
Clinical laboratory geneticists are encouraged to document in the patient’s record the rationale for the use of a particular procedure or test, whether or not it is in conformance with these Standards and Guidelines.
鼓励临川遗传师记录诊疗过程中的诊疗建议的原因，不论是否和本指南相符。
They also are advised to take notice of the date any particular guideline was adopted and to consider other relevant medical and scientific information that becomes available after that date.
临川遗传师应注意指南的发布时间，并关注其他相关医学和科研信息的更新。
It also would be prudent to consider whether intellectual property interests may restrict the performance of certain tests and other procedures.
同时应注意，某些检查项目受专利保护。



Abstract
摘要
The American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) previously developed guidance for the interpretation of sequence variants.1
ACMG曾发布一个关于基因变异解读的指南[1]。
In the past decade, sequencing technology has evolved rapidly with the advent of high-throughput next-generation sequencing.
过去十年，下一代高通量测序技术（high-throughput next-generation sequencing，NGS）高速发展。
By adopting and leveraging next-generation sequencing, clinical laboratories are now performing an ever-increasing catalogue of genetic testing spanning genotyping, single genes, gene panels, exomes, genomes, transcriptomes, and epigenetic assays for genetic disorders.
通过使用NGS技术，临床实验室
By virtue of increased complexity, this shift in genetic testing has been accompanied by new challenges in sequence interpretation. In this context the ACMG convened a workgroup in 2013 comprising representatives from the ACMG, the Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP), and the College of American Pathologists to revisit and revise the standards and guidelines for the interpretation of sequence variants. The group consisted of clinical laboratory directors and clinicians. This report represents expert opinion of the workgroup with input from ACMG, AMP, and College of American Pathologists stakeholders. These recommendations primarily apply to the breadth of genetic tests used in clinical laboratories, including genotyping, single genes, panels, exomes, and genomes. This report recommends the use of specific standard terminology—“pathogenic,” “likely pathogenic,” “uncertain significance,” “likely benign,” and “benign”—to describe variants identified in genes that cause Mendelian disorders. Moreover, this recommendation describes a process for classifying variants into these five categories based on criteria using typical types of variant evidence (e.g., population data, computational data, functional data, segregation data). Because of the increased complexity of analysis and interpretation of clinical genetic testing described in this report, the ACMG strongly recommends that clinical molecular genetic testing should be performed in a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments–approved laboratory, with results interpreted by a board-certified clinical molecular geneticist or molecular genetic pathologist or the equivalent.