Reporting Sequence Variants


Reporting Sequence Variants
Abstract• Introduction• Methods• General Considerations• Proposed Criteria for Interpretation of Sequence Variants• Reporting Sequence Variants• Special Considerations• How Should Health-Care Providers use these Guidelines and Recommendations?• Disclosure• References• Acknowledgments• Author information• Supplementary information
Writing succinct yet informative clinical reports can be a challenge as the complexity of the content grows from reporting variants in single genes to multigene panels to exomes and genomes. Several guidance documents have been developed for reporting, including full sample reports of the ACMG clinical laboratory standards for next-generation sequencing guidance.32,33,34,35 Clinical reports are the final product of laboratory testing and often are integrated into a patient’s electronic health record. Therefore, effective reports are concise, yet easy to understand. Reports should be written in clear language that avoids medical genetics jargon or defines such terms when used. The report should contain all of the essential elements of the test performed, including structured results, an interpretation, references, methodology, and appropriate disclaimers. These essential elements of the report also are emphasized by Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments regulations and the College of American Pathologists laboratory standards for next-generation sequencing clinical tests.36

Results
The results section should list variants using HGVS nomenclature (see Nomenclature). Given the increasing number of variants found in genetic tests, presenting the variants in tabular form with essential components may best convey the information. These components include nomenclature at both the nucleotide (genomic and complementary DNA) and protein level, gene name, disease, inheritance, exon, zygosity, and variant classification. An example of a table to report structured elements of a variant is found in the Supplementary Appendix S1 online. Parental origin may also be included if known. In addition, if specific variants are analyzed in a genotyping test, the laboratory should specifically note the variants interrogated, with their full description and historical nomenclature if it exists. Furthermore, when reporting results from exome or genome sequencing, or occasionally very large disease-targeted panels, grouping variants into categories such as “Variants in Disease Genes with an Established Association with the Reported Phenotype,” “Variants in Disease Genes with a Likely Association with the Reported Phenotype,” and (where appropriate) “Incidental (Secondary) Findings” may be beneficial.

Interpretation
The interpretation should contain the evidence supporting the variant classification, including its predicted effect on the resultant protein and whether any variants identified are likely to fully or partially explain the patient’s indication for testing. The report also should include any recommendations to the clinician for supplemental clinical testing, such as enzymatic/functional testing of the patient’s cells and variant testing of family members, to further inform variant interpretation. The interpretation section should address all variants described in the results section but may contain additional information. It should be noted whether the variant has been reported previously in the literature or in disease or control databases. The references, if any, that contributed to the classification should be cited where discussed and listed at the end of the report. The additional information described in the interpretation section may include a summarized conclusion of the results of in silico analyses and evolutionary conservation analyses. However, individual computational predictions (e.g., scores, terms such as “damaging”) should be avoided given the high likelihood of misinterpretation by health-care providers who may be unfamiliar with the limitations of predictive algorithms (see In Silico Predictive Programs, above). A discussion of decreased penetrance and variable expressivity of the disorder, if relevant, should be included in the final report. Examples of how to describe evidence for variant classification on clinical reports are found in the Supplementary Appendix S1 online.

Methodology
The methods and types of variants detected by the assay and those refractory to detection should be provided in the report. Limitations of the assay used to detect the variants also should be reported. Methods should include those used to obtain nucleic acids (e.g., polymerase chain reaction, capture, whole-genome amplification), as well as those to analyze the nucleic acids (e.g., bidirectional Sanger sequencing, next-generation sequencing, chromosomal microarray, genotyping technologies), because this may provide the health-care provider with the necessary information to decide whether additional testing is required to follow up on the results. The methodology section should also give the official gene names approved by the Human Genome Organization Gene Nomenclature Committee, RefSeq accession numbers for transcripts, and genome build, including versions. For large panels, gene-level information may be posted and referenced by URL. The laboratory may choose to add a disclaimer that addresses general pitfalls in laboratory testing, such as sample quality and sample mix-up.

Access to patient advocacy groups, clinical trials, and research
Although specific clinical guidance for a patient is not recommended for laboratory reports, provision of general information for categories of results (e.g., all positives) is appropriate and helpful. A large number of patient advocacy groups and clinical trials are now available for support and treatment of many diseases. Laboratories may choose to add this information to the body of the report or attach the information so it is sent to the health-care provider along with the report. Laboratories may make an effort to connect the health-care provider to research groups working on specific diseases when a variant’s effect is classified as “uncertain,” as long as Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act patient privacy requirements are followed.

Variant reanalysis
As evidence on variants evolves, previous classifications may later require modification. For example, the availability of variant frequency data among large populations has led many uncertain significance variants to be reclassified as benign, and testing additional family members may result in the reclassification of variants.

As the content of sequencing tests expands and the number of variants identified grows, expanding to thousands and millions of variants from exome and genome sequencing, the ability for laboratories to update reports as variant knowledge changes will be untenable without appropriate mechanisms and resources to sustain those updates. To set appropriate expectations with health-care providers and patients, laboratories should provide clear policies on the reanalysis of data from genetic testing and whether additional charges for reanalysis may apply. Laboratories are encouraged to explore innovative approaches to give patients and providers more efficient access to updated information.37,38

For reports containing variants of uncertain significance in genes related to the primary indication, and in the absence of updates that may be proactively provided by the laboratory, it is recommended that laboratories suggest periodic inquiry by health-care providers to determine whether knowledge of any variants of uncertain significance, including variants reported as likely pathogenic, has changed. By contrast, laboratories are encouraged to consider proactive amendment of cases when a variant reported with a near-definitive classification (pathogenic or benign) must be reclassified. Regarding physician responsibility, see the ACMG guidelines on the duty to recontact.39

Confirmation of findings
Recommendations for the confirmation of reported variants is addressed elsewhere.35,36 Except as noted, confirmation studies using an orthogonal method are recommended for all sequence variants that are considered to be pathogenic or likely pathogenic for a Mendelian disorder. These methods may include, but are not limited to, re-extraction of the sample and testing, testing of parents, restriction enzyme digestion, sequencing the area of interest a second time, or using an alternate genotyping technology.

