Special Considerations

Special Considerations
Abstract• Introduction• Methods• General Considerations• Proposed Criteria for Interpretation of Sequence Variants• Reporting Sequence Variants• Special Considerations• How Should Health-Care Providers use these Guidelines and Recommendations?• Disclosure• References• Acknowledgments• Author information• Supplementary information
Evaluating and reporting variants in GUS based on the indication for testing
Genome and exome sequencing are identifying new genotype–phenotype connections. When the laboratory finds a variant in a gene without a validated association to the patient’s phenotype, it is a GUS. This can occur when a gene has never been associated with any patient phenotype or when the gene has been associated with a different phenotype from that under consideration. Special care must be taken when applying the recommended guidelines to a GUS. In such situations, utilizing variant classification rules developed for recognized genotype–phenotype associations is not appropriate. For example, when looking across the exome or genome, a de novo observation is no longer strong evidence for pathogenicity given that all individuals are expected to have approximately one de novo variant in their exome or 100 in their genome. Likewise, thousands of variants across a genome could segregate with a significant logarithm of the odds (LOD) score. Furthermore, many deleterious variants that are clearly disruptive to a gene or its resultant protein (nonsense, frameshift, canonical ±1,2 splice site, exon-level deletion) may be detected; however, this is insufficient evidence for a causative role in any given disease presentation.

Variants found in a GUS may be considered as candidates and reported as “variants in a gene of uncertain significance.” These variants, if reported, should always be classified as uncertain significance. Additional evidence would be required to support the gene’s association to disease before any variant in the gene itself can be considered pathogenic for that disease.5 For example, additional cases with matching rare phenotypes and deleterious variants in the same gene would enable the individual variants to be classified according to the recommendations presented here.

Evaluating variants in healthy individuals or as incidental findings
Caution must be exercised when using these guidelines to evaluate variants in healthy or asymptomatic individuals or to interpret incidental findings unrelated to the primary indication for testing. In these cases the likelihood of any identified variant being pathogenic may be far less than when performing disease-targeted testing. As such, the required evidence to call a variant pathogenic should be higher, and extra caution should be exercised. In addition, the predicted penetrance of pathogenic variants found in the absence of a phenotype or family history may be far less than predicted based on historical data from patients ascertained as having disease.

Mitochondrial variants
The interpretation of mitochondrial variants other than well-established pathogenic variants is complex and remains challenging; several special considerations are addressed here.

The nomenclature differs from standard nomenclature for nuclear genes, using gene name and m. numbering (e.g., m.8993T>C) and p. numbering, but not the standard c. numbering (see also Nomenclature). The current accepted reference sequence is the Revised Cambridge Reference Sequence of the Human Mitochondrial DNA: GenBank sequence NC_012920 gi:251831106.40,41

Heteroplasmy or homoplasmy should be reported, along with an estimate of heteroplasmy of the variant if the test has been validated to determine heteroplasmy levels. Heteroplasmy percentages in different tissue types may vary from the sample tested; therefore, low heteroplasmic levels also must be interpreted in the context of the tissue tested, and they may be meaningful only in the affected tissue such as muscle. Over 275 mitochondrial DNA variants relating to disease have been recorded (http://mitomap.org/bin/view.pl/MITOMAP/WebHome).42 MitoMap is considered the main source of information related to mitochondrial variants as well as haplotypes. Other resources, such as frequency information (http://www.mtdb.igp.uu.se/),43 secondary structures, sequences, and alignment of mitochondrial transfer RNAs (http://mamit-trna.u-strasbg.fr/),44 mitochondrial haplogroups (http://www.phylotree.org/)45and other information (http://www.mtdnacommunity.org/default.aspx),46 may prove useful in interpreting mitochondrial variants.

Given the difficulty in assessing mitochondrial variants, a separate evidence checklist has not been included. However, any evidence needs to be applied with additional caution (for a review, see ref. 47). The genes in the mitochondrial genome encode for transfer RNA as well as for protein; therefore, evaluating amino acid changes is relevant only for genes encoding proteins. Similarly, because many mitochondrial variants are missense variants, evidence criteria for truncating variants likely will not be helpful. Because truncating variants do not fit the known variant spectrum in most mitochondrial genes, their significance may be uncertain. Although mitochondrial variants are typically maternally inherited, they can be sporadic, yet de novo variants are difficult to assess because of heteroplasmy that may be below an assay’s detection level or different between tissues. The level of heteroplasmy may contribute to the variable expression and reduced penetrance that occurs within families. Nevertheless, there remains a lack of correlation between the percentage of heteroplasmy and disease severity.47 Muscle, liver, or urine may be additional specimen types useful for clinical evaluation. Undetected heteroplasmy may also affect outcomes of case, case–control, and familial concordance studies. In addition, functional studies are not readily available, although evaluating muscle morphology may be helpful (i.e., the presence of ragged red fibers). Frequency data and published studies demonstrating causality may often be the only assessable criteria on the checklist. An additional tool for mitochondrial diseases may be haplogroup analysis, but this may not represent a routine method that clinical laboratories have used, and the clinical correlation is not easy to interpret.

Consideration should be given to testing nuclear genes associated with mitochondrial disorders because variants in nuclear genes could be causative of oxidative disorders or modulating the mitochondrial variants.

Pharmacogenomics
Establishing the effects of variants in genes involved with drug metabolism is challenging, in part because a phenotype is only apparent upon exposure to a drug. Still, variants in genes related to drug efficacy and risk for adverse events have been described and are increasingly used in clinical care. Gene summaries and clinically relevant variants can be found in the Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base (http://www.pharmgkb.org/).48 Alleles and nomenclature for the cytochrome P450 gene family is available at http://www.cypalleles.ki.se/.49 Although the interpretation of PGx variants is beyond the scope of this document, we include a discussion of the challenges and distinctions associated with the interpretation and reporting of PGx results.

The traditional nomenclature of PGx alleles uses star (*) alleles, which often represent haplotypes, or a combination of variants on the same allele. Traditional nucleotide numbering using outdated reference sequences is still being applied. Converting traditional nomenclature to standardized nomenclature using current reference sequences is an arduous task, but it is necessary for informatics applications with next-generation sequencing.

Many types of variants have been identified in PGx genes, such as truncating, missense, deletions, duplications (of functional as well as nonfunctional alleles), and gene conversions, resulting in functional, partially functional (decreased or reduced function), and nonfunctional (null) alleles. Interpreting sequence variants often requires determining haplotype from a combination of variants detected. Haplotypes are typically presumed based on population frequencies and known variant associations rather than testing directly for chromosomal phase (molecular haplotyping).

In addition, for many PGx genes (particularly variants in genes coding for enzymes), the overall phenotype is derived from a diplotype, which is the combination of variants or haplotypes on both alleles. Because PGx variants do not directly cause disease, using terms related to metabolism (rapid, intermediate, poor); efficacy (resistant, responsive, sensitive); or “risk,” rather than pathogenic, may be more appropriate. Further nomenclature and interpretation guidelines are needed to establish consistency in this field.

Common complex disorders
Unlike Mendelian diseases, the identification of common, complex disease genes, such as those contributing to type 2 diabetes, coronary artery disease, and hypertension, has largely relied on population-based approaches (e.g., genome-wide association studies) rather than family-based studies.50,51 Currently, numerous genome-wide association study reports have resulted in the cataloguing of over 1,200 risk alleles for common, complex diseases and traits. Most of these variants are in nongenic regions, however, and additional studies are required to determine whether any of the variants are directly causal through effects on regulatory elements, for example, or are in linkage disequilibrium with causal variants.52

Common, complex risk alleles typically confer low relative risk and are meager in their predictive power.53 To date, the utility of common, complex risk allele testing for patient care54 has been unclear, and models to combine multiple markers into a cumulative risk score often are flawed and are usually no better than traditional risk factors such as family history, demographics, and nongenetic clinical phenotypes.55,56 Moreover, in almost all of the common diseases the risk alleles can explain only up to 10% of the variance in the population, even when the disease has high heritability. Given the complexity of issues, this recommendation does not address the interpretation and reporting of complex trait alleles. We recognize, however, that some of these alleles are identified during the course of sequencing Mendelian genes, and therefore guidance on how to report such alleles when found incidentally is needed. The terms “pathogenic” and “likely pathogenic” are not appropriate in this context, even when the association is statistically valid. Until better guidance is developed, an interim solution is to report these variants as “risk alleles” or under a separate “other reportable” category in the diagnostic report. The evidence for the risk, as identified in the case–control/genome-wide association studies, can be expressed by modifying the terms, such as “established risk allele,” “likely risk allele,” or “uncertain risk allele,” if desired.

Somatic variants
The description of somatic variants, primarily those observed in cancer cells, includes complexities not encountered with constitutional variants, because the allele ratios are highly variable and tumor heterogeneity can cause sampling differences. Interpretation helps select therapy and predicts treatment response or the prognosis of overall survival or tumor progression–free survival, further complicating variant classification. For the interpretation of negative results, understanding the limit of detection of the sequencing assay (at what allele frequency the variant can be detected by the assay) is important and requires specific knowledge of the tumor content of the sample. Variant classification categories are also different, with somatic variants compared with germ-line variants, with terms such as “responsive,” “resistant,” “driver,” and “passenger” often used. Whether a variant is truly somatic is confirmed by sequence analysis of the patient’s germ-line DNA. A different set of interpretation guidelines is needed for somatic variants, with tumor-specific databases used for reference, in addition to databases used for constitutional findings. To address this, a workgroup has recently been formed by the AMP.

