Methods

In 2013 a workgroup consisting of ACMG, Association for Molecular Pathology (AMP), and College of American Pathologists members, representing clinical laboratory directors and clinicians, was formed with the goal of developing a recommendation for the use of standard terminology for classifying sequence variants using available evidence weighted according to a system developed through expert opinion, workgroup consensus, and community input. To assess the views of the clinical laboratory community, surveys were sent to over 100 sequencing laboratories in the United States and Canada that were listed in GeneTests.org, requesting input on terminology preferences and evaluation of evidence for classifying variants. Laboratory testing experience included rare disease as well as pharmacogenomics and somatic cancer testing. The first survey, aimed at assessing terminology preferences, was sent in February 2013, and the results were presented in an open forum at the 2013 ACMG annual meeting including over 75 attendees. Survey respondents represented more than 45 laboratories in North America. The outcome of the survey and open forum indicated that (i) a five-tier terminology system using the terms “pathogenic,” “likely pathogenic,” “uncertain significance,” “likely benign,” and “benign” was preferred and already in use by a majority of laboratories, and (ii) the first effort of the workgroup should focus on Mendelian and mitochondrial variants.

In the first survey, laboratories also were asked to provide their protocols for variant assessment, and 11 shared their methods. By analyzing all the protocols submitted, the workgroup developed a set of criteria to weight variant evidence and a set of rules for combining criteria to arrive at one of the five classification tiers. Workgroup members tested the scheme within their laboratories for several weeks using variants already classified in their laboratories and/or by the broader community. In addition, typical examples of variants harboring the most common types of evidence were tested for classification assignment to ensure the system would classify those variants according to current approaches consistently applied by workgroup members. A second survey was sent in August 2013 to the same laboratories identified through GeneTests.org as well as through AMP’s listserv of ~2,000 members, along with the proposed classification scheme and a detailed supplement describing how to use each of the criteria. Laboratories were asked to use the scheme and to provide feedback as to the suitability and relative weighting of each criteria, the ease of use of the classification system, and whether they would adopt such a system in their own laboratory. Responses from over 33 laboratories indicated majority support for the proposed approach, and feedback further guided the development of the proposed standards and guidelines.

In November 2013 the workgroup held a workshop at the AMP meeting with more than 50 attendees, presenting the revised classification criteria and two potential scoring systems. One system is consistent with the approach presented here and the other is a point system whereby each criterion is given a number of points, assigning positive points for pathogenic criteria and negative points for benign criteria, with the total defining the variant class. With an audience-response system, the participants were asked how they would weight each criterion (as strong, moderate or supporting, or not used) during evaluation of variant evidence. Again, the responses were incorporated into the classification system presented here. It should be noted that while the majority of respondents did favor a point system, the workgroup felt that the assignment of specific points for each criterion implied a quantitative level of understanding of each criterion that is currently not supported scientifically and does not take into account the complexity of interpreting genetic evidence.

The workgroup also evaluated the literature for recommendations from other professional societies and working groups that have developed variant classification guidelines for well-studied genes in breast cancer, colon cancer, and cystic fibrosis and statistical analysis programs for quantitative evaluation of variants in select diseases.2,3,4,5 While those variant analysis guidelines are useful in a specific setting, it was difficult to apply their proposed criteria to all genes and in different laboratory settings. The variant classification approach described in this article is meant to be applicable to variants in all Mendelian genes, whether identified by single gene tests, multigene panels, exome sequencing, or genome sequencing. We expect that this variant classification approach will evolve as technology and knowledge improve. We should also note that those working in specific disease groups should continue to develop more focused guidance regarding the classification of variants in specific genes given that the applicability and weight assigned to certain criteria may vary by gene and disease.