General Considerations

Terminology
A mutation is defined as a permanent change in the nucleotide sequence, whereas a polymorphism is defined as a variant with a frequency above 1%. The terms “mutation” and “polymorphism,” however, which have been used widely, often lead to confusion because of incorrect assumptions of pathogenic and benign effects, respectively. Thus, it is recommended that both terms be replaced by the term “variant” with the following modifiers: (i) pathogenic, (ii) likely pathogenic, (iii) uncertain significance, (iv) likely benign, or (v) benign. Although these modifiers may not address all human phenotypes, they comprise a five-tier system of classification for variants relevant to Mendelian disease as addressed in this guidance. It is recommended that all assertions of pathogenicity (including “likely pathogenic”) be reported with respect to a condition and inheritance pattern (e.g., c.1521_1523delCTT (p.Phe508del), pathogenic, cystic fibrosis, autosomal recessive).

It should be noted that some laboratories may choose to have additional tiers (e.g., subclassification of variants of uncertain significance, particularly for internal use), and this practice is not considered inconsistent with these recommendations. It should also be noted that the terms recommended here differ somewhat from the current recommendations for classifying copy-number variants detected by cytogenetic microarray.6 The schema recommended for copy-number variants, while also including five tiers, uses “uncertain clinical significance—likely pathogenic” and “uncertain clinical significance—likely benign.” The majority of the workgroup was not supportive of using “uncertain significance” to modify the terms “likely pathogenic” or “likely benign” given that it was felt that the criteria presented here to classify variants into the “likely” categories included stronger evidence than outlined in the copy-number variant guideline and that combining these two categories would create confusion for the health-care providers and individuals receiving clinical reports. However, it was felt that the use of the term “likely” should be restricted to variants where the data support a high likelihood that it is pathogenic or a high likelihood that it is benign. Although there is no quantitative definition of the term “likely,” guidance has been proposed in certain variant classification settings. A survey of the community during an ACMG open forum, however, suggested a much wider range of uses of the term “likely.” Recognizing this, we propose that the terms “likely pathogenic” and “likely benign” be used to mean greater than 90% certainty of a variant either being disease-causing or benign to provide laboratories with a common, albeit arbitrary, definition. Similarly, the International Agency for Research on Cancer guideline2 supports a 95% level of certainty of pathogenicity, but the workgroup (confirmed by feedback during the ACMG open forum) felt that clinicians and patients were willing to tolerate a slightly higher chance of error, leading to the 90% decision. It should also be noted that at present most variants do not have data to support a quantitative assignment of variant certainty to any of the five categories given the heterogeneous nature of most diseases. It is hoped that over time experimental and statistical approaches to objectively assign pathogenicity confidence to variants will be developed and that more rigorous approaches to defining what the clinical community desires in terms of confidence will more fully inform terminologies and likelihoods.

The use of new terminologies may require education of the community. Professional societies are encouraged to engage in educating all laboratories as well as health-care providers on the use of these terms, and laboratories also are encouraged to directly educate their ordering physicians.

Nomenclature
A uniform nomenclature, informed by a set of standardized criteria, is recommended to ensure the unambiguous designation of a variant and enable effective sharing and downstream use of genomic information. A standard gene variant nomenclature (http://www.hgvs.org/mutnomen) is maintained and versioned by the Human Genome Variation Society (HGVS),7 and its use is recommended as the primary guideline for determining variant nomenclature except as noted.6 Laboratories should note the version being used in their test methods. Tools are available to provide correct HGVS nomenclature for describing variants (https://mutalyzer.nl).8 Clinical reports should include sequence reference(s) to ensure unambiguous naming of the variant at the DNA level, as well as to provide coding and protein nomenclature to assist in functional interpretations (e.g., “g.” for genomic sequence, “c.” for coding DNA sequence, “p.” for protein, “m.” for mitochondria). The coding nomenclature should be described using the “A” of the ATG translation initiation codon as position number 1. Where historical alternate nomenclature has been used, current nomenclature should be used with an additional notation of the historical naming. The reference sequence should be complete and derived from either the National Center for Biotechnology Information RefSeq database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/RefSeq/)9 with the version number or the Locus Reference Genomic database (http://www.lrg-sequence.org).10 Genomic coordinates should be used and defined according to a standard genome build (e.g., hg19) or a genomic reference sequence that covers the entire gene (including the 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions and promoter). A reference transcript for each gene should be used and provided in the report when describing coding variants. The transcript should represent either the longest known transcript and/or the most clinically relevant transcript. Community-supported reference transcripts can often be identified through Locus Reference Genomic,10 the Consensus CDS Database,11 the Human Gene Mutation Database (http://www.hgmd.cf.ac.uk), ClinVar (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/clinvar), or a locus-specific database. However, laboratories should evaluate the impact of the variant on all clinically relevant transcripts, including alternate transcripts that contain additional exons or extended untranslated regions, when there are known variants in these regions that are clinically interpretable.

Not all types of variants (e.g., complex variants) are covered by the HGVS recommendations, but possible descriptions for complex variants have been reported.7,12 In addition, this ACMG recommendation supports three specific exceptions to the HGVS nomenclature rules: (i) “X” is still considered acceptable for use in reporting nonsense variants in addition to the current HGVS recommendation of “*” and “Ter”; (ii) it is recommended that exons be numbered according to the chosen reference transcript used to designate the variant; and (iii) the term “pathogenic” is recommended instead of “affects function” because clinical interpretation is typically directly evaluating pathogenicity.

Literature and database use
A large number of databases contain a growing number of variants that are continuously being discovered in the human genome. When classifying and reporting a variant, clinical laboratories may find valuable information in databases, as well as in the published literature. As noted above, sequence databases can also be used to identify appropriate reference sequences. Databases can be useful for gathering information but should be used with caution.

Population databases (Table 1) are useful in obtaining the frequencies of variants in large populations. Population databases cannot be assumed to include only healthy individuals and are known to contain pathogenic variants. These population databases do not contain extensive information regarding the functional effect of these variants or any possible associated phenotypes. When using population databases, one must determine whether healthy or disease cohorts were used and, if possible, whether more than one individual in a family was included, as well as the age range of the subjects.

Table 1: Population, disease-specific, and sequence databases
Full table
Figures/tables index
Next table
Disease databases (Table 1) primarily contain variants found in patients with disease and assessment of the variants’ pathogenicity. Disease and gene-specific databases often contain variants that are incorrectly classified, including incorrect claims published in the peer-reviewed literature, because many databases do not perform a primary review of evidence. When using disease databases, it is important to consider how patients were ascertained, as described below.

When using databases, clinical laboratories should (i) determine how frequently the database is updated, whether data curation is supported, and what methods were used for curation; (ii) confirm the use of HGVS nomenclature and determine the genome build and transcript references used for naming variants; (iii) determine the degree to which data are validated for analytical accuracy (e.g., low-pass next-generation sequencing versus Sanger-validated variants) and evaluate any quality metrics that are provided to assess data accuracy, which may require reading associated publications; and (iv) determine the source and independence of the observations listed.

Variant assessment also includes searching the scientific and medical literature. Literature using older nomenclature and classification or based on a single observation should be used with caution. When identifying individuals and families with a variant, along with associated phenotypes, it is important to consider how patients were ascertained. This caveat is important when assessing data from publications because affected individuals and related individuals are often reported multiple times, depending on the context and size of the study. This may be due to authorship overlap, interlaboratory collaborations, or a proband and family members being followed across different clinical systems. This may mistakenly lead to duplicate counting of affected patients and a false increase in variant frequency. Overlapping authorship or institutions is the first clue to the potential for overlapping data sets.

Clinical laboratories should implement an internal system to track all sequence variants identified in each gene and clinical assertions when reported. This is important for tracking genotype–phenotype correlations and the frequency of variants in affected and normal populations. Clinical laboratories are encouraged to contribute to variant databases, such as ClinVar, including clinical assertions and evidence used for the variant classification, to aid in the continued understanding of the impact of human variation. Whenever possible, clinical information should be provided following Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act regulations for privacy. Clinical laboratories are encouraged to form collaborations with clinicians to provide clinical information to better understand how genotype influences clinical phenotype and to resolve differences in variant interpretation between laboratories. Because of the great potential to aid clinical laboratory practice, efforts are underway for clinical variant databases to be expanded and standardized. Standardization will provide easier access to updated information as well as facilitate submission from the clinical laboratory. For example, the ClinVar database allows for the deposition of variants with clinical observations and assertions, with review status tracked to enable a more transparent view of the levels of quality of the curation.

Computational (in silico) predictive programs
A variety of in silico tools, both publicly and commercially available, can aid in the interpretation of sequence variants. The algorithms used by each tool may differ but can include determination of the effect of the sequence variant at the nucleotide and amino acid level, including determination of the effect of the variant on the primary and alternative gene transcripts, other genomic elements, as well as the potential impact of the variant on the protein. The two main categories of such tools include those that predict whether a missense change is damaging to the resultant protein function or structure and those that predict whether there is an effect on splicing (Table 2). Newer tools are beginning to address additional noncoding sequences.13

Table 2: In silico predictive algorithms
Full table
Previous table
Figures/tables index
Next table
The impact of a missense change depends on criteria such as the evolutionary conservation of an amino acid or nucleotide, the location and context within the protein sequence, and the biochemical consequence of the amino acid substitution. The measurement of one or a combination of these criteria is used in various in silico algorithms that assess the predicted impact of a missense change. Several efforts have evaluated the performance of available prediction software to compare them with each other and to assess their ability to predict “known” disease-causing variants.14,15,16,17 In general, most algorithms for missense variant prediction are 65–80% accurate when examining known disease variants.16 Most tools also tend to have low specificity, resulting in overprediction of missense changes as deleterious, and are not as reliable at predicting missense variants with a milder effect.18 The in silico tools more commonly used for missense variant interpretation in clinical laboratories include PolyPhen2,19 SIFT,20 and MutationTaster.21 A list of in silico tools used to predict missense variants can be found in Table 2.

Multiple software programs have been developed to predict splicing as it relates to the creation or loss of splice sites at the exonic or intronic level.22 In general, splice site prediction tools have higher sensitivity (~90–100%) relative to specificity (~60–80%) in predicting splice site abnormalities.23,24 Some of the in silico tools commonly used for splice site variant interpretation are listed in Table 2.

While many of the different software programs use different algorithms for their predictions, they have similarities in their underlying basis; therefore, predictions combined from different in silico tools are considered as a single piece of evidence in sequence interpretation as opposed to independent pieces of evidence. The use of multiple software programs for sequence variant interpretation is also recommended because the different programs each have their own strengths and weaknesses, depending on the algorithm; in many cases performance can vary by the gene and protein sequence. These are only predictions, however, and their use in sequence variant interpretation should be implemented carefully. It is not recommended that these predictions be used as the sole source of evidence to make a clinical assertion.

