Proposed Criteria for Interpretation of Sequence Variants


The following approach to evaluating evidence for a variant is intended for interpretation of variants observed in patients with suspected inherited (primarily Mendelian) disorders in a clinical diagnostic laboratory setting. It is not intended for the interpretation of somatic variation, pharmacogenomic (PGx) variants, or variants in genes associated with multigenic non-Mendelian complex disorders. Care must be taken when applying these rules to candidate genes (“genes of uncertain significance” (GUS)) in the context of exome or genome studies (see Special Considerations below) because this guidance is not intended to fulfill the needs of the research community in its effort to identify new genes in disease.

Although these approaches can be used for evaluating variants found in healthy individuals or secondary to the indication for testing, further caution must be used, as noted in several parts of the guideline, given the low prior likelihood that most variants unrelated to the indication are pathogenic. Although we expect that, in general, these guidelines will apply for variant classification regardless of whether the variant was identified through analysis of a single gene, gene panel, exome, genome, or transcriptome, it is important to consider the differences between implicating a variant as pathogenic (i.e., causative) for a disease and a variant that may be predicted to be disruptive/damaging to the protein for which it codes, but is not necessarily implicated in a disease. These rules are intended to determine whether a variant in a gene with a definitive role in a Mendelian disorder may be pathogenic for that disorder. Pathogenicity determination should be independent of interpreting the cause of disease in a given patient. For example, a variant should not be reported as pathogenic in one case and not pathogenic in another simply because the variant is not thought to explain disease in a given case. Pathogenicity should be determined by the entire body of evidence in aggregate, including all cases studied, arriving at a single conclusion.

This classification approach may be somewhat more stringent than laboratories have applied to date. They may result in a larger proportion of variants being categorized as uncertain significance. It is hoped that this approach will reduce the substantial number of variants being reported as “causative” of disease without having sufficient supporting evidence for that classification. It is important to keep in mind that when a clinical laboratory reports a variant as pathogenic, health-care providers are highly likely to take that as “actionable” and to alter the treatment or surveillance of a patient25 or remove such management in a genotype-negative family member, based on that determination (see How Should Health-Care Providers Use These Guidelines and Recommendations, below).

We have provided two sets of criteria: one for classification of pathogenic or likely pathogenic variants (Table 3) and one for classification of benign or likely benign variants (Table 4). Each pathogenic criterion is weighted as very strong (PVS1), strong (PS1–4); moderate (PM1–6), or supporting (PP1–5), and each benign criterion is weighted as stand-alone (BA1), strong (BS1–4), or supporting (BP1–6). The numbering within each category does not convey any differences of weight and is merely labeled to help refer to the different criteria. For a given variant, the user selects the criteria based on the evidence observed for the variant. The criteria then are combined according to the scoring rules in Table 5 to choose a classification from the five-tier system. The rules apply to all available data on a variant, whether gathered from the current case under investigation or from well-vetted previously published data. Unpublished case data may also be obtained through public resources (e.g., ClinVar or locus specific databases) and from a laboratory’s own database. To provide critical flexibility to variant classification, some criteria listed as one weight can be moved to another weight using professional judgment, depending on the evidence collected. For example, rule PM3 could be upgraded to strong if there were multiple observations of detection of the variant in trans (on opposite chromosomes) with other pathogenic variants (see PM3 BP2 cis/trans Testing for further guidance). By contrast, in situations when the data are not as strong as described, judgment can be used to consider the evidence as fulfilling a lower level (e.g., see PS4, Note 2 in Table 3). If a variant does not fulfill criteria using either of these sets (pathogenic or benign), or the evidence for benign and pathogenic is conflicting, the variant defaults to uncertain significance. The criteria, organized by type and strength, is shown in Figure 1. Please note that expert judgment must be applied when evaluating the full body of evidence to account for differences in the strength of variant evidence.

Table 3: Criteria for classifying pathogenic variants
Full table
Previous table
Figures/tables index
Next table
Table 4: Criteria for classifying benign variants
Full table
Previous table
Figures/tables index
Next table
Table 5: Rules for combining criteria to classify sequence variants
Full table
Previous table
Figures/tables index
Next table
Figure 1
f1
Evidence framework. This chart organizes each of the criteria by the type of evidence as well as the strength of the criteria for a benign (left side) or pathogenic (right side) assertion. Evidence code descriptions can be found in Tables 3 and 4. BS, benign strong; BP, benign supporting; FH, family history; LOF, loss of function; MAF, minor allele frequency; path., pathogenic; PM, pathogenic moderate; PP, pathogenic supporting; PS, pathogenic strong; PVS, pathogenic very strong.

Full size image (324 KB)
Figures/tables index
The following is provided to more thoroughly explain certain concepts noted in the criteria for variant classification (Tables 3 and 4) and to provide examples and/or caveats or pitfalls in their use. This section should be read in concert with Tables 3 and 4.

PVS1 null variants
Certain types of variants (e.g., nonsense, frameshift, canonical ±1 or 2 splice sites, initiation codon, single exon or multiexon deletion) can often be assumed to disrupt gene function by leading to a complete absence of the gene product by lack of transcription or nonsense-mediated decay of an altered transcript. One must, however, exercise caution when classifying these variants as pathogenic by considering the following principles:

(i)	When classifying such variants as pathogenic, one must ensure that null variants are a known mechanism of pathogenicity consistent with the established inheritance pattern for the disease. For example, there are genes for which only heterozygous missense variants cause disease and null variants are benign in a heterozygous state (e.g., many hypertrophic cardiomyopathy genes). A novel heterozygous nonsense variant in the MYH7 gene would not be considered pathogenic for dominant hypertrophic cardiomyopathy based solely on this evidence, whereas a novel heterozygous nonsense variant in the CFTR gene would likely be considered a recessive pathogenic variant.
(ii) One must also be cautious when interpreting truncating variants downstream of the most 3′ truncating variant established as pathogenic in the literature. This is especially true if the predicted stop codon occurs in the last exon or in the last 50 base pairs of the penultimate exon, such that nonsense-mediated decay26 would not be predicted, and there is a higher likelihood of an expressed protein. The length of the predicted truncated protein would also factor into the pathogenicity assignment, however, and such variants cannot be interpreted without a functional assay.
(iii) For splice-site variants, the variant may lead to exon skipping, shortening, or inclusion of intronic material as a result of alternative donor/acceptor site usage or creation of new sites. Although splice-site variants are predicted to lead to a null effect, confirmation of impact requires functional analysis by either RNA or protein analysis. One must also consider the possibility of an in-frame deletion/insertion, which could retain the critical domains of the protein and hence lead to either a mild or neutral effect with a minor length change (PM4) or a gain-of-function effect.
(iv) Considering the presence of alternate gene transcripts and understanding which are biologically relevant, and in which tissues the products are expressed, are important. If a truncating variant is confined to only one or not all transcripts, one must be cautious about overinterpreting variant impact given the presence of the other protein isoforms.
(v)	One must also be cautious in assuming that a null variant will lead to disease if found in an exon where no other pathogenic variants have been described, given the possibility that the exon may be alternatively spliced. This is particularly true if the predicted truncating variant is identified as an incidental finding (unrelated to the indication for testing), given the low prior likelihood of finding a pathogenic variant in that setting.
PS1 same amino acid change
In most cases, when one missense variant is known to be pathogenic, a different nucleotide change that results in the same amino acid (e.g., c.34G>C (p.Val12Leu) and c.34G>T (p.Val12Leu)) can also be assumed to be pathogenic, particularly if the mechanism of pathogenicity occurs through altered protein function. However, it is important to assess the possibility that the variant may act directly through the specific DNA change (e.g., through splicing disruption as assessed by at least computational analysis) instead of through the amino acid change, in which case the assumption of pathogenicity may no longer be valid.

PS2 PM6 de novo variants
A variant observed to have arisen de novo (parental samples testing negative) is considered strong support for pathogenicity if the following conditions are met:

(i)	Both parental samples were shown through identity testing to be from the biological parents of the patient. Note that PM6 applies if identity is assumed but not confirmed.
(ii) The patient has a family history of disease that is consistent with de novo inheritance (e.g., unaffected parents for a dominant disorder). It is possible, however, that more than one sibling may be affected because of germ-line mosaicism.
(iii) The phenotype in the patient matches the gene’s disease association with reasonable specificity. For example, this argument is strong for a patient with a de novo variant in the NIPBL gene who has distinctive facial features, hirsutism, and upper-limb defects (i.e., Cornelia de Lange syndrome), whereas it would be weaker for a de novo variant found by exome sequencing in a child with nonspecific features such as developmental delay.
PS3 BS3 functional studies
Functional studies can be a powerful tool in support of pathogenicity; however, not all functional studies are effective in predicting an impact on a gene or protein function. For example, certain enzymatic assays offer well-established approaches to assess the impact of a missense variant on enzymatic function in a metabolic pathway (e.g., α-galactosidase enzyme function). On the other hand, some functional assays may be less consistent predictors of the effect of variants on protein function. To assess the validity of a functional assay, one must consider how closely the functional assay reflects the biological environment. For example, assaying enzymatic function directly from biopsied tissue from the patient or an animal model provides stronger evidence than expressing the protein in vitro. Likewise, evidence is stronger if the assay reflects the full biological function of the protein (e.g., substrate breakdown by an enzyme) compared with only one component of function (e.g., adenosine triphosphate hydrolysis for a protein with additional binding properties). Validation, reproducibility, and robustness data that assess the analytical performance of the assay and account for specimen integrity, which can be affected by the method and time of acquisition, as well as storage and transport, are important factors to consider. These factors are mitigated in the case of an assay in a Clinical Laboratory Improvement Amendments laboratory–developed test or commercially available kit. Assays that assess the impact of variants at the messenger RNA level can be highly informative when evaluating the effects of variants at splice junctions and within coding sequences and untranslated regions, as well as deeper intronic regions (e.g., messenger RNA stability, processing, or translation). Technical approaches include direct analysis of RNA and/or complementary DNA derivatives and in vitro minigene splicing assays.

PS4 PM2 BA1 BS1 BS2 variant frequency and use of control populations
Assessing the frequency of a variant in a control or general population is useful in assessing its potential pathogenicity. This can be accomplished by searching publicly available population databases (e.g., 1000 Genomes Project, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute Exome Sequencing Project Exome Variant Server, Exome Aggregation Consortium; Table 1), as well as using race-matched control data that often are published in the literature. The Exome Sequencing Project data set is useful for Caucasian and African American populations and has coverage data to determine whether a variant is absent. Although the 1000 Genomes Project data cannot be used to assess the absence of a variant, it has a broader representation of different racial populations. The Exome Aggregation Consortium more recently released allele frequency data from >60,000 exomes from a diverse set of populations that includes approximately two-thirds of the Exome Sequencing Project data. In general, an allele frequency in a control population that is greater than expected for the disorder (Table 6) is considered strong support for a benign interpretation for a rare Mendelian disorder (BS1) or, if over 5%, it is considered as stand-alone support (BA1). Furthermore, if the disease under investigation is fully penetrant at an early age and the variant is observed in a well-documented healthy adult individual for a recessive (homozygous), dominant (heterozygous), or X-linked (hemizygous) condition, then this is considered strong evidence for a benign interpretation (BS2). If the variant is absent, one should confirm that the read depth in the database is sufficient for an accurate call at the variant site. If a variant is absent from (or below the expected carrier frequency if recessive) a large general population or a control cohort (>1,000 individuals) and the population is race-matched to the patient harboring the identified variant, then this observation can be considered a moderate piece of evidence for pathogenicity (PM2). Many benign variants are “private” (unique to individuals or families), however, and therefore absence in a race-matched population is not considered sufficient or even strong evidence for pathogenicity.

Table 6: Assessment of variant frequency in the general population for curated variant classification
Full table
Previous table
Figures/tables index
The use of population data for case–control comparisons is most useful when the populations are well phenotyped, have large frequency differences, and the Mendelian disease under study is early onset. Patients referred to a clinical laboratory for testing are likely to include individuals sent to “rule out” a disorder, and thus they may not qualify as well-phenotyped cases. When using a general population as a control cohort, the presence of individuals with subclinical disease is always a possibility. In both of these scenarios, however, a case–control comparison will be underpowered with respect to detecting a difference; as such, showing a statistically significant difference can still be assumed to provide supportive evidence for pathogenicity, as noted above. By contrast, the absence of a statistical difference, particularly with extremely rare variants and less penetrant phenotypes, should be interpreted cautiously.

Odds ratios (ORs) or relative risk is a measure of association between a genotype (i.e., the variant is present in the genome) and a phenotype (i.e., affected with the disease/outcome) and can be used for either Mendelian diseases or complex traits. In this guideline we are addressing only its use in Mendelian disease. While relative risk is different from the OR, relative risk asymptotically approaches ORs for small probabilities. An OR of 1.0 means that the variant does not affect the odds of having the disease, values above 1.0 mean there is an association between the variant and the risk of disease, and those below 1.0 mean there is a negative association between the variant and the risk of disease. In general, variants with a modest Mendelian effect size will have an OR of 3 or greater, whereas highly penetrant variants will have very high ORs; for example, APOE E4/E4 homozygotes compared with E3/E3 homozygotes have an OR of 13 (https://www.tgen.org/home/education-outreach/past-summer-interns/2012-summer-interns/erika-kollitz.aspx#.VOSi3C7G_vY). However, the confidence interval (CI) around the OR is as important as the measure of association itself. If the CI includes 1.0 (e.g., OR = 2.5, CI = 0.9–7.4), there is little confidence in the assertion of association. In the above APOE example the CI was ~10–16. Very simple OR calculators are available on the Internet (e.g., http://www.hutchon.net/ConfidOR.htm/ and http://easycalculation.com/statistics/odds-ratio.php/).27,28

PM1 mutational hot spot and/or critical and well-established functional domain
Certain protein domains are known to be critical to protein function, and all missense variants in these domains identified to date have been shown to be pathogenic. These domains must also lack benign variants. In addition, mutational hotspots in less well-characterized regions of genes are reported, in which pathogenic variants in one or several nearby residues have been observed with greater frequency. Either evidence can be considered moderate evidence of pathogenicity.

PM3 BP2 cis/trans testing
Testing parental samples to determine whether the variant occurs in cis (the same copy of the gene) or in trans (different copies of the gene) can be important for assessing pathogenicity. For example, when two heterozygous variants are identified in a gene for a recessive disorder, if one variant is known to be pathogenic, then determining that the other variant is in trans can be considered moderate evidence for pathogenicity of the latter variant (PM3). In addition, this evidence could be upgraded to strong if there are multiple observations of the variant in trans with other pathogenic variants. If the variant is present among the general population, however, a statistical approach would be needed to control for random co-occurrence. By contrast, finding the second variant in cis would be supporting, though not definitive, evidence for a benign role (BP2). In the case of uncertain pathogenicity of two heterozygous variants identified in a recessive gene, then the determination of the cis versus trans nature of the variants does not necessarily provide additional information with regard to the pathogenicity of either variant. However, the likelihood that both copies of the gene are impacted is reduced if the variants are found in cis.

In the context of dominant disorders the detection of a variant in trans with a pathogenic variant can be considered supporting evidence for a benign impact (BP2) or, in certain well-developed disease models, may even be considered stand-alone evidence, as has been validated for use in assessing CFTR variants.3

PM4 BP3 protein length changes due to in-frame deletions/insertions and stop losses
The deletion or insertion of one or more amino acids as well as the extension of a protein by changing the stop codon to an amino acid codon (e.g., a stop loss variant) is more likely to disrupt protein function compared with a missense change alone as a result of length changes in the protein. Therefore, in-frame deletions/insertions and stop losses are considered moderate evidence of pathogenicity. The larger the deletion, insertion, or extension, and the more conserved the amino acids are in a deleted region, the more substantial is the evidence to support pathogenicity. By contrast, small in-frame deletions/insertions in repetitive regions, or regions that are not well conserved in evolution, are less likely to be pathogenic.

PM5 novel missense at the same position
A novel missense amino acid change occurring at the same position as another pathogenic missense change (e.g., Trp38Ser and Trp38Leu) is considered moderate evidence but cannot be assumed to be pathogenic. This is especially true if the novel change is more conservative compared with the established pathogenic missense variant. Also, the different amino acid change could lead to a different phenotype. For example, different substitutions of the Lys650 residue of the FGFR3 gene are associated with a wide range of clinical phenotypes: p.Lys650Gln or p.Lys650Asn causes mild hypochondroplasia; p.Lys650Met causes severe achondroplasia with developmental delay and acanthosis nigricans; and thanatophoric dysplasia type 2, a lethal skeletal dysplasia, arises from p.Lys650Glu.

PP1 BS4 segregation analysis
Care must be taken when using segregation of a variant in a family as evidence for pathogenicity. In fact, segregation of a particular variant with a phenotype in a family is evidence for linkage of the locus to the disorder but not evidence of the pathogenicity of the variant itself. A statistical approach has been published29,30 with the caveat that the identified variant may be in linkage disequilibrium with the true pathogenic variant in that family. Statistical modeling takes into account age-related penetrance and phenocopy rates, with advanced methods also incorporating in silico predictions and co-occurrence with a known pathogenic variant into a single quantitative measure of pathogenicity.31 Distant relatives are important to include because they are less likely to have both the disease and the variant by chance than members within a nuclear family. Full gene sequencing (including entire introns and 5′ and 3′ untranslated regions) may provide greater evidence that another variant is not involved or identify additional variants to consider as possibly causative. Unless the genetic locus is evaluated carefully, one risks misclassifying a nonpathogenic variant as pathogenic.

When a specific variant in the target gene segregates with a phenotype or disease in multiple affected family members and multiple families from diverse ethnic backgrounds, linkage disequilibrium and ascertainment bias are less likely to confound the evidence for pathogenicity. In this case, this criterion may be taken as moderate or strong evidence, depending on the extent of segregation, rather than supporting evidence.

On the other hand, lack of segregation of a variant with a phenotype provides strong evidence against pathogenicity. Careful clinical evaluation is needed to rule out mild symptoms of reportedly unaffected individuals, as well as possible phenocopies (affected individuals with disease due to a nongenetic or different genetic cause). Also, biological family relationships need to be confirmed to rule out adoption, nonpaternity, sperm and egg donation, and other nonbiological relationships. Decreased and age-dependent penetrance also must be considered to ensure that asymptomatic family members are truly unaffected.

Statistical evaluation of cosegregation may be difficult in the clinical laboratory setting. If appropriate families are identified, clinical laboratories are encouraged to work with experts in statistical or population genetics to ensure proper modeling and to avoid incorrect conclusions of the relevance of the variant to the disease.

PP2 BP1 variant spectrum
Many genes have a defined spectrum of pathogenic and benign variation. For genes in which missense variation is a common cause of disease and there is very little benign variation in the gene, a novel missense variant can be considered supporting evidence for pathogenicity (PP2). By contrast, for genes in which truncating variants are the only known mechanism of variant pathogenicity, missense variants can be considered supporting evidence for a benign impact (BP1). For example, truncating variants in ASPM are the primary type of pathogenic variant in this gene, which causes autosomal recessive primary microcephaly, and the gene has a high rate of missense polymorphic variants. Therefore missense variants in ASPM can be considered to have this line of supporting evidence for a benign impact.

PP3 BP4 computational (in silico) data
Not overestimating computational evidence is important, particularly given that different algorithms may rely on the same (or similar) data to support predictions and most algorithms have not been validated against well-established pathogenic variants. In addition, algorithms can have vastly different predictive capabilities for different genes. If all of the in silico programs tested agree on the prediction, then this evidence can be counted as supporting. If in silico predictions disagree, however, then this evidence should not be used in classifying a variant. The variant amino acid change being present in multiple nonhuman mammalian species in an otherwise well-conserved region, suggesting the amino acid change would not compromise function, can be considered strong evidence for a benign interpretation. One must, however, be cautious about assuming a benign impact in a nonconserved region if the gene has recently evolved in humans (e.g., genes involved in immune function).

PP4 using phenotype to support variant claims
In general, the fact that a patient has a phenotype that matches the known spectrum of clinical features for a gene is not considered evidence for pathogenicity given that nearly all patients undergoing disease-targeted tests have the phenotype in question. If the following criteria are met, however, the patient’s phenotype can be considered supporting evidence: (i) the clinical sensitivity of testing is high, with most patients testing positive for a pathogenic variant in that gene; (ii) the patient has a well-defined syndrome with little overlap with other clinical presentations (e.g., Gorlin syndrome including basal cell carcinoma, palmoplantar pits, odontogenic keratocysts); (iii) the gene is not subject to substantial benign variation, which can be determined through large general population cohorts (e.g., Exome Sequencing Project); and (iv) family history is consistent with the mode of inheritance of the disorder.

PP5 BP6 reputable source
There are increasing examples where pathogenicity classifications from a reputable source (e.g., a clinical laboratory with long-standing expertise in the disease area) have been shared in databases, yet the evidence that formed the basis for classification was not provided and may not be easily obtainable. In this case, the classification, if recently submitted, can be used as a single piece of supporting evidence. However, laboratories are encouraged to share the basis for classification as well as communicate with submitters to enable the underlying evidence to be evaluated and built upon. If the evidence is available, this criterion should not be used; instead, the criteria relevant to the evidence should be used.

BP5 alternate locus observations
When a variant is observed in a case with a clear alternate genetic cause of disease, this is generally considered supporting evidence to classify the variant as benign. However, there are exceptions. An individual can be a carrier of an unrelated pathogenic variant for a recessive disorder; therefore, this evidence is much stronger support for a likely benign variant classification in a gene for a dominant disorder compared with a gene for a recessive disorder. In addition, there are disorders in which having multiple variants can contribute to more severe disease. For example, two variants, one pathogenic and one novel, are identified in a patient with a severe presentation of a dominant disease. A parent also has mild disease. In this case, one must consider the possibility that the novel variant could also be pathogenic and contributing to the increased severity of disease in the proband. In this clinical scenario, observing the novel variant as the second variant would not support a benign classification of the novel variant (though it is also not considered support for a pathogenic classification without further evidence). Finally, there are certain diseases in which multigenic inheritance is known to occur, such as Bardet-Beidel syndrome, in which case the additional variant in the second locus may also be pathogenic but should be reported with caution.

BP7 synonymous variants
There is increasing recognition that splicing defects, beyond disruption of the splice consensus sequence, can be an important mechanism of pathogenicity, particularly for genes in which loss of function is a common mechanism of disease. Therefore, one should be cautious in assuming that a synonymous nucleotide change will have no effect. However, if the nucleotide position is not conserved over evolution and splicing assessment algorithms predict neither an impact to a splice consensus sequence nor the creation of a new alternate splice consensus sequence, then a splicing impact is less likely. Therefore, if supported by computational evidence (BP4), one can classify novel synonymous variants as likely benign. However, if computational evidence suggests a possible impact on splicing or there is raised suspicion for an impact (e.g., the variant occurs in trans with a known pathogenic variant in a gene for a recessive disorder), then the variant should be classified as uncertain significance until a functional evaluation can provide a more definitive assessment of impact or other evidence is provided to rule out a pathogenic role.

