How Should Health-Care Providers use these Guidelines and Recommendations?


How Should Health-Care Providers use these Guidelines and Recommendations?
Abstract• Introduction• Methods• General Considerations• Proposed Criteria for Interpretation of Sequence Variants• Reporting Sequence Variants• Special Considerations• How Should Health-Care Providers use these Guidelines and Recommendations?• Disclosure• References• Acknowledgments• Author information• Supplementary information
The primary purpose of clinical laboratory testing is to support medical decision making. In the clinic, genetic testing is generally used to identify or confirm the cause of disease and to help the health-care provider make individualized treatment decisions including the choice of medication. Given the complexity of genetic testing, results are best realized when the referring health-care provider and the clinical laboratory work collaboratively in the testing process.

When a health-care provider orders genetic testing, the patient’s clinical information is integral to the laboratory’s analysis. As health-care providers increasingly utilize genomic (exome or genome) sequencing, the need for detailed clinical information to aid in interpretation assumes increasing importance. For example, when a laboratory finds a rare or novel variant in a genomic sequencing sample, the director cannot assume it is relevant to a patient just because it is rare, novel, or de novo. The laboratory must evaluate the variant and the gene in the context of the patient’s and family’s history, physical examinations, and previous laboratory tests to distinguish between variants that cause the patient’s disorder and those that are incidental (secondary) findings or benign. Indeed, accurate and complete clinical information is so essential for the interpretation of genome-level DNA sequence findings that the laboratory can reasonably refuse to proceed with the testing if such information is not provided with the test sample.

For tests that cover a broad range of phenotypes (large panels, exome and genome sequencing) the laboratory may find candidate causative variants. Further follow-up with the health-care provider and patient may uncover additional evidence to support a variant. These additional phenotypes may be subclinical, requiring additional clinical evaluation to detect (e.g., temporal bone abnormalities detected by computed tomography in a hearing-impaired patient with an uncertain variant in SLC26A4, the gene associated with Pendred syndrome). In addition, testing other family members to establish when a variant is de novo, when a variant cosegregates with disease in the family, and when a variant is in trans with a pathogenic variant in the same recessive disease-causing gene is valuable. Filtering out or discounting the vast majority of variants for dominant diseases when they can be observed in healthy relatives is possible, making the interpretation much more efficient and conclusive. To this end, it is strongly recommended that every effort be made to include parental samples along with that of the proband, so-called “trio” testing (mother, father, affected child), in the setting of exome and genome sequencing, particularly for suspected recessive or de novo causes. Obviously this will be easier to achieve for pediatric patients than for affected adults. In the absence of one or both parents, the inclusion of affected and unaffected siblings can be of value.

Many genetic variants can result in a range of phenotypic expression (variable expressivity), and the chance of disease developing may not be 100% (reduced penetrance), further underscoring the importance of providing comprehensive clinical data to the clinical laboratory to aid in variant interpretation. Ideally, it is recommended that clinical data be deposited into, and shared via, centralized repositories as allowable by Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act and institutional review board regulations. Importantly, referring health-care providers can further assist clinical laboratories by recruiting DNA from family members in scenarios where their participation will be required to interpret results, (e.g., when evaluating cosegregation with disease using affected family members, genotyping parents to assess for de novo occurrence and determining the phase of variants in recessive disorders using first-degree relatives).

A key issue for health-care providers is how to use the evidence provided by genetic testing in medical management decisions. Variant analysis is, at present, imperfect, and the variant category reported does not imply 100% certainty. In general, a variant classified as pathogenic using the proposed classification scheme has met criteria informed by empirical data such that a health-care provider can use the molecular testing information in clinical decision making. Efforts should be made to avoid using this as the sole evidence of Mendelian disease; it should be used in conjunction with other clinical information when possible. Typically, a variant classified as likely pathogenic has sufficient evidence that a health-care provider can use the molecular testing information in clinical decision making when combined with other evidence of the disease in question. For example, in the prenatal setting an ultrasound may show a key confirmatory finding; in postnatal cases, other data such as enzyme assays, physical findings, or imaging studies may conclusively support decision making. However, it is recommended that all possible follow-up testing, as described above, be pursued to generate additional evidence related to a likely pathogenic variant because this may permit the variant to be reclassified as pathogenic. A variant of uncertain significance should not be used in clinical decision making. Efforts to resolve the classification of the variant as pathogenic or benign should be undertaken. While this effort to reclassify the variant is underway, additional monitoring of the patient for the disorder in question may be prudent. A variant considered likely benign has sufficient evidence that a health-care provider can conclude that it is not the cause of the patient’s disorder when combined with other information, for example, if the variant does not segregate in an affected family member and complex inheritance patterns are unlikely. A variant considered benign has sufficient evidence that a health-care provider can conclude that it is not the cause of the patient’s disorder.

How the genetic testing evidence is used is also dependent on the clinical context and indication for testing. In a prenatal diagnostic case where a family is considering irrevocable decisions such as fetal treatment or pregnancy termination, the weight of evidence from the report and other sources such as fetal ultrasound needs to be considered before action is taken. When a genetic test result is the only evidence in a prenatal setting, variants considered likely pathogenic must be explained carefully to families. It is therefore critical for referring health-care providers to communicate with the clinical laboratory to gain an understanding of how variants are classified to assist in patient counseling and management.


